copilot: Review instructions for uorb msgs (#26169)
PX4/PX4-Autopilot: .github/instructions/msg.instructions.md

---
applyTo: "msg/**.msg"
---

# Review Guidelines for PX4 uORB Message Definitions

You are an expert embedded software engineer specializing in the PX4 Autopilot system.

> Your task is to review `.msg` files to ensure they comply with the official [PX4 uORB Documentation Standard](https://docs.px4.io/main/en/uorb/uorb_documentation).

Reviewer: You might want to use a relative path

## 1. File Structure & Header

- **Mandatory Short Description:** Every message must start with a `#` comment providing a succinct explanation (e.g., `# Validated airspeed`). 
  - No terminating full stop for single-line descriptions.
- **Long Description:** Optional but encouraged for complex messages. Should be separated from the short description by an empty comment line (`#`). Use full punctuation for multi-line descriptions.
- **Timestamp:** All messages **must** include `uint64 timestamp # [us] Time since system start`.
- **Versioning:** If the message is in `msg/versioned/`, it **must** include `uint32 MESSAGE_VERSION`.

## 2. Field Documentation Standards

> - **Inline Comments:** Every field and constant should have a comment on the same line, separated by exactly one space.

Reviewer: _every_ field no exceptions?

Author: We have "should" so it isn't "must". But I guess "every" does imply that it is must, and we do have a few exceptions on constants.

```suggestion
- **Inline Comments:** Fields and constants should have a comment on the same line, separated by exactly one space.
```

Reviewer: What about fields/constants that are self explanatory? Is it because a comment is required for properly generating documentation?

Author: @dakejahl The toolchain for generating documentation will be smart enough not to care - it will report warnings in some cases but it won't choke if it doesn't find something it needs to render the page.

My take though is that it very rare for a field not to need a comment because they are never as self-explanatory as the author thinks. Especially we require units etc so these should be added.

For contants it isn't as clear, but this section is purely about fields, so I will modify need to modify it to remove "and constant".

Author: But in any case, an author can ignore a comment from copilot, and I'd prefer the suggestion was made and ignored so they think about it. 

I have updated this whole section in https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/pull/26169/files#r2667007452

    - **Invalid Values:** Use `[@invalid NaN]` to indicate that a `NaN` value represents "no data".
      If another value represents "no data" that would replace `NaN` as the invalid value. A short description can follow the value by one space.
- **Case & Punctuation:** Field comments should start with a capital letter and omit the final full stop if they are a single sentence.

## 3. Constants & Enums

- **Naming:** Constants related to a specific field (enums) should share a common prefix.
  - The field name and the prefix should match for new fields (except constants are upper case)
  - Constants should appear after the field in which they are used.
- **Documentation:** Constants do not require unit metadata; the description follows the `#` after a space.
- **Standard Constants:** Standardized fields like `MESSAGE_VERSION` or `ORB_QUEUE_LENGTH` do not require individual documentation.

## 4. Multi-Topic Messages

- If a single `.msg` file defines multiple topics (e.g., `actuator_controls_0`, `actuator_controls_1`), the file must end with a `# TOPICS` line followed by the space-separated topic names.

## 5. Deprecation & Semantic Changes

> - **Field Deprecation:** Do not delete fields. Rename them with a `DEPRECATED_` prefix or add a `# DEPRECATED` comment to maintain binary compatibility.

Reviewer: > Do not delete fields

Since when? We need to be able to extend or remove uORB messages

> Rename them with a `DEPRECATED_` prefix

Renaming breaks compatibility

Author: I have no idea - I wonder if this came from docs before versions were supported.

> - **Semantic Changes:** If a unit changes (e.g., degrees to radians), the field **must** be renamed to prevent silent failures in subscribers.

Author: Yes. Wrong. See https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/pull/26169/files#r2656960447
